\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename inline-anki.info
@settitle Inline Anki User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Inline Anki: (inline-anki). Embed implicit flashcards in flowing text.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Inline Anki User Manual
@subtitle for version 0.4.0
@author Martin Edström
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Inline Anki User Manual

This manual is for Inline Anki version 0.4.0.

@quotation
Copyright (C) 2023-2025 Martin Edström <meedstrom91@@gmail.com>

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation@comma{} either version 3 of the License@comma{} or (at your option) any later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful@comma{} but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  See the GNU General Public License for more details.

@end quotation

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Installation::
* Usage::
* Implementation notes::
* Q&A::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Usage

* To push cards::
* Config variables::
* Warning::
* Open in Emacs::
* Mass-editing::

Implementation notes

* Permanent limitations::
* Limitations vs. anki-editor/org-anki: Limitations vs anki-editor/org-anki. 
* Syntax of a flashcard::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Not yet on (M)ELPA@.  If you have @uref{https://github.com/radian-software/straight.el, straight.el}@comma{} you can install the package with this initfile snippet:

@lisp
(use-package inline-anki
  :straight (inline-anki :type git :host github :repo "meedstrom/inline-anki"))
@end lisp


Alternatively with Doom Emacs@comma{} this goes in @samp{packages.el}:

@lisp
(package! inline-anki :recipe (:host github :repo "meedstrom/inline-anki"))
@end lisp


Below@comma{} you'll find a recommended config snippet for Org-mode.  It lets you quickly create a @samp{#+begin_flashcard} block at point with the C-c @comma{} key (@samp{org-insert-structure-template}).

@lisp
(with-eval-after-load 'org
  (add-to-list 'org-structure-template-alist '("f" . "flashcard")))
@end lisp

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

@menu
* To push cards::
* Config variables::
* Warning::
* Open in Emacs::
* Mass-editing::
@end menu

@node To push cards
@section To push cards

Your only direct interaction with this package is one command that you would run every once in a while (weeks? months? depends on you) to update the Anki database.

To update the Anki database:

@enumerate
@item
Make sure Anki has the AnkiConnect add-on installed
@item
Make sure you have @samp{curl} installed
@item
Start Anki
@item
From your Org file@comma{} type @samp{M-x inline-anki-push-notes-in-buffer RET}
@itemize
@item
Or push from all Org files in the current directory and its subdirectories@comma{} by typing @samp{M-x inline-anki-push-notes-in-directory RET}
@end itemize
@end enumerate

You may like to know that:

@itemize
@item
When you upload a note@comma{} it overwrites that note in Anki.  @strong{Any edits made inside Anki will be forgotten!}  The only thing Anki gets to remember about a note is the review schedule.

@item
As a convenience@comma{} if you comment-out a note expression@comma{} the next push will tell Anki to suspend all the cards for that note.
@itemize
@item
If you later uncomment it@comma{} the next push will unsuspend them.
@item
Note that you can still follow a workflow of suspending cards during your review sessions.  I consider it a psychological boon that Anki will forget these suspends on the next push@comma{} forcing you to revise all the bad notes you found before you can push again.
@itemize
@item
Just remember to look up the suspends inside Anki but edit in the corresponding source Org file.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@item
There's a bit of a gimmick: if a note has 3 clozes@comma{} and you study it a bit@comma{} and later you remove the first cloze@comma{} the second and third cloze cards will @strong{inherit the scheduling of the first and second}.  So technically@comma{} you can have cards that aren't scheduled faithfully to the algorithm@comma{} and failure statistics @emph{may} be referring to a cloze card that you've removed.
@itemize
@item
Up to you whether to care@comma{} but in my opinion@comma{} it changes nothing in practice.
@item
No surprise to experienced Anki-users@comma{} but the third field's original scheduling will be attached to an empty card.  Remember that you can clean up empty cards with the menu option "Check database@dots{}".
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Config variables
@section Config variables

@itemize
@item
@samp{inline-anki-deck}
@itemize
@item
Default "Default".
@end itemize

@item
@samp{inline-anki-note-type}
@itemize
@item
Default "Cloze from Outer Space".
@end itemize

@item
@samp{inline-anki-emphasis-type}
@itemize
@item
Default "_"@comma{} can be changed to "*"@comma{} "/" or other things you find in @samp{org-emphasis-alist}.
@end itemize

@item
@samp{inline-anki-send-tags}
@itemize
@item
Default @samp{nil}.  Controls whether or not to put a note's Org tags in the Anki note tags.  Can be an allowlist like @samp{("tag1" "tag2")} or a blocklist like @samp{(not "tag1" "tag2")}.  Value @samp{t} sends all tags.
@item
A benefit with the @samp{nil} value is faster upload if you have hundreds of Org files.
@end itemize

@item
@samp{inline-anki-ignore-file-regexps}
@itemize
@item
Helps the command @samp{inline-anki-push-notes-in-directory} decide whether or not to visit a file.  If that file's full name matches one of the regular expressions in this list@comma{} skip the file.
@end itemize

@item
@samp{inline-anki-fields}
@itemize
@item
See docstring.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Warning
@section Warning

You must not @strong{hard-wrap} your text (e.g. with M-q@comma{} @samp{fill-paragraph}) if you want Anki to receive the whole flashcard.

@node Open in Emacs
@section Open in Emacs

It would be convenient if you could click a link in Anki to open the corresponding Org file in Emacs.

By default@comma{} @samp{inline-anki-fields} ships an extra field that shows the filename the note came from.  With addons such as @uref{https://ankiweb.net/shared/info/879473266}@comma{} it should be possible to jump from Anki to Emacs using emacsclient.  Instructions TBD@.

@node Mass-editing
@section Mass-editing

If you switch @samp{inline-anki-emphasis-type} to bold or italic@comma{} remember to @strong{edit all the cards you had written}!

Tips:

@itemize
@item
To search the current buffer for flashcards@comma{} type @samp{M-x inline-anki-occur RET}.

@item
To search every file in the directory@comma{} type @samp{M-x inline-anki-rgrep RET}.
@itemize
@item
Then you can edit all at once with @uref{http://github.com/mhayashi1120/Emacs-wgrep, wgrep} or a keyboard macro@comma{} for example.
@itemize
@item
The wgrep method won't cut it for multiline flashcards@comma{} as you'll see@comma{} but if you don't have many of those@comma{} you could simply hand-edit each.  If you have many@comma{} try a keyboard macro.
@end itemize
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Implementation notes
@chapter Implementation notes

@menu
* Permanent limitations::
* Limitations vs. anki-editor/org-anki: Limitations vs anki-editor/org-anki. 
* Syntax of a flashcard::
@end menu

@node Permanent limitations
@section Permanent limitations

There are @strong{three flaws} which will never go away:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Flaw 1:} Like anki-editor@comma{} inline-anki does not let you review inside Emacs.  You have to review in your Anki app.

@item
@strong{Flaw 2:} Like with anki-editor@comma{} your Org files hold the "master copy" of each flashcard: @strong{you cannot edit the cards from within Anki}.  If you tried@comma{} such edits would be lost on next sync.

You have to return to your computer and edit there@comma{} in Emacs.

@itemize
@item
This means you can't make small corrections on-the-fly while reviewing.

Bit annoying@comma{} yes@comma{} but two-way sync is a notoriously finicky dev challenge so if such a feature was present@comma{} users would run into sync conflicts and nobody wants to deal with that.

@item
Fortunately@comma{} this is less of a problem for us than for regular Anki users@comma{} since the flashcards are serving double duty as body text.  You will be able to see and refine the text of the flashcard at your leisure@comma{} @emph{when not reviewing}@comma{} in contrast with other SRS when you only see it during review.
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Flaw 3:} The note format is constrained -- you can't express every kind of flashcard possible in Anki.

@itemize
@item
For me this is a good trade@comma{} if that means the flashcards stay in my life.  Until now@comma{} they never stayed long because Anki was too separated from my notes.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Limitations vs anki-editor/org-anki
@section Limitations vs. anki-editor/org-anki

Many traditional features are ABSENT in inline-anki.

@itemize
@item
It uses only one deck
@item
It uses only one note type (cloze)
@item
It clozes only one deletion at a time
@item
You cannot set tags on a per-note basis
@itemize
@item
The note will still inherit tags from the Org subtree
@itemize
@item
Note that Anki tags lose much of their organizational purpose if your notes primarily live in Org files anyway -- you'll be organizing them from within @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node, org-node}@comma{} org-roam or whichever system you have for browsing Org files@comma{} not from within Anki.  However@comma{} at least two use-cases remain:
@itemize
@item
You can display the tags inside cards as a contextual hint@comma{} @uref{https://edstrom.dev/grwhs/show-tags-as-helpful-hint-in-anki-cards, if you code this in the card template}
@item
You can use the tags to set up Custom Study sessions on a filtered subset of notes
@itemize
@item
Invaluable since we dump all notes into one deck
@end itemize
@end itemize
@item
Finally@comma{} even if you leave @samp{inline-anki-send-tags} at nil@comma{} inline-anki always attaches one tag named after the sync date@comma{} in this style: "from-emacs-2023-09-20"
@itemize
@item
This tag lets you separate inline-anki notes from your "handmade" notes
@item
This tag lets you see if you have stale inline-anki notes that aren't being updated (perhaps because you deleted them from the source)
@end itemize
@end itemize
@end itemize
@item
You get no indication in Emacs that Anki has flagged a card as "Marked" or "Leech"
@itemize
@item
You can still see this in Anki's own card browser@comma{} so you can still sit down and go through them manually every now and then -- just like a normal Anki user@comma{} with the difference that when you see something that needs to change@comma{} you have to open the source file in Emacs and edit there.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Syntax of a flashcard
@section Syntax of a flashcard

@itemize
@item
To identify a flashcard@comma{} inline-anki looks for one of the following things:
@itemize
@item
A magic string at the @strong{start of a list item}: @samp{@@anki}.
@itemize
@item
When Anki assigns it an ID@comma{} this will become a @@ glyph followed by a 13-digit number in superscript@comma{} such as @samp{@@^@{1693535436701@}}.
@end itemize
@item
A magic string at the @strong{end of a line}: @samp{@@anki} OR @samp{^@{anki@}}.
@itemize
@item
In this case@comma{} you can omit the @@ glyph.
@itemize
@item
Since the @samp{@@anki} form is easier to remember and easier to type@comma{} I suggest you just always type that and remove the glyph later where you think its absence looks better.
@end itemize
@end itemize
@item
A structure template named @samp{#+begin_flashcard}.
@itemize
@item
When Anki assigns it an ID@comma{} it becomes something like @samp{#+begin_flashcard 1693535436702}.
@end itemize
@item
A drawer named @samp{:anki:}
@itemize
@item
When Anki assigns it an ID@comma{} it's renamed to something like @samp{:anki-1693535436702:}.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@item
Clozes are marked by underline text.  If you prefer bold or italic@comma{} configure @samp{inline-anki-emphasis-type}.
@itemize
@item
If necessary@comma{} you can write Anki's own @samp{@{@{c1::@}@}} syntax directly.  Best I can tell@comma{} it's mainly useful for writing math equations.  However that makes the source unreadable/ugly@comma{} so you may as well do math in Anki only for now.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Q&A
@chapter Q&A

@itemize
@item
Can I continue using my [org-drill/org-anki/@dots{}] cards?
@itemize
@item
Yes!  Those packages treat whole Org subtrees as their "data objects"@comma{} and this package does not.  You can even have an inline-anki card @emph{inside} an org-anki subtree.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@bye
